# Configuring Kotlin Symbol Processing (KSP)

[Kotlin Symbol Processing](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/ksp-overview.html) is a tool that allows feeding Kotlin source
code to _processors_, which can in turn use this information to generate code, classes, or resources, for instance.
Amper provides built-in support for KSP.

Some popular libraries also include a KSP processor to enhance their capabilities, such as
[Room](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/room) or
[Moshi](https://github.com/square/moshi#codegen).

!!! info

    Amper works with KSP2, so any processors used must be compatible with KSP2.
    We’re expecting most processors to make this upgrade soon, as KSP1 is no longer part of KSP releases.
    However, at the moment, you might still see some gaps in support, such as issues with native targets.

To add KSP processors to your module, add their maven coordinates to the `settings.kotlin.ksp.processors` list:

```yaml
settings:
  kotlin:
    ksp:
      processors:
        - androidx.room:room-compiler:2.7.0-alpha12
```

## Multiplatform support

In multiplatform modules, all settings from the `settings` section apply to all platforms by default, including KSP 
processors.
If you only want to add KSP processors for a specific platform, use a `settings` block with a
[`@platform` qualifier](../multiplatform.md#platform-qualifier):

```yaml
# the Room processor will only process code that compiles to the Android platform
settings@android:
  kotlin:
    ksp:
      processors:
        - androidx.room:room-compiler:2.7.0-alpha12
```

!!! warning "Generated code is not available in common sources"

    In multiplatform modules, KSP is called for each platform separately. This means that any code generated by KSP
    processors will be available only for the corresponding platform. There is no way at the moment to access the 
    generated code from the common fragment (`src`) or intermediate fragments (e.g. `src@native`).

    This limitation comes from the Kotlin compilation model and how KSP aligns with it. Please follow 
    [the relevant KSP issue](https://github.com/google/ksp/issues/567) for more information.

## Passing options to KSP processors

Some processors can be customized by passing options. You can pass these options using the `processorOptions` section:

```yaml
settings:
  kotlin:
    ksp:
      processors:
        - androidx.room:room-compiler:2.7.0-alpha12
      processorOptions:
        room.schemaLocation: ./schema
```

Consult the documentation of the processor you want to use for more information about the available options.

!!! note

    Note: all options are passed to all processors by KSP. It's the processor's responsibility to use unique option names
    to avoid clashes with other processor options.

## Using your own local KSP processor

You can implement your own processor in an Amper module as a regular JVM library, and then use it to process code from
other modules in your project.

Usually, 3 modules are involved:

* The _processor_ module, with the actual processor implementation
* The _annotations_ module (optional), which contains annotations that the processor looks for in the consumer code
* The _consumer_ module, which uses KSP with the custom processor

The annotations module is a very simple JVM library module without any required dependencies (it's just here to provide
some annotations to work with, if necessary):

```yaml
# my-processor-annotations/module.yaml
product:
  type: lib
  platforms: [ jvm ]
```

The processor module is a JVM library with a `compile-only` dependency on KSP facilities, and on the custom annotations
module:

```yaml
# my-processor/module.yaml
product:
  type: lib
  platforms: [ jvm ]

dependencies:
  - ../my-processor-annotations
  - com.google.devtools.ksp:symbol-processing-api:2.0.21-1.0.25: compile-only
```

The consumer module adds a regular dependency on the annotations module, and a reference to the processor module:

```yaml
# my-consumer/module.yaml
product: jvm/app

dependencies:
  - ../my-processor-annotations # to be able to annotate the consumer code

settings:
  kotlin:
    ksp:
      processors:
        - ../my-processor # path to the module implementing the KSP processor
```

For more information about how to write your own processor, check out
[the KSP documentation](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/ksp-quickstart.html#create-a-processor-of-your-own).
